Hello there.
This is the De La Rue.
And welcome back.
So in the last lecture, we looked at flawed and double data types and you can use float or double if
you are fine with computations that could lead to approximate results.
For instance, if you want to measure distance between two points and let's say the actual distances,
515.8 miles, and if your program computes it as, say, 515.1 miles, then it is still fine, it is
tolerable, it is acceptable, and life is still good.
But if your application needs exact results, then you should avoid float or double data types.
For example, let's say if you have an E commerce website, then you would want all the sales to be
exactly represented.
If you charge less, you may run into losses.
That's because float and double are associated with certain pitfalls and many engineers are not aware
of this.
And things could be fine most of the time.
But if they run into this limitation that we are going to see, then they would see some surprising
results.
And that could be disastrous to.
So let's go ahead and check it out.
And it's very important to be aware of this.
Och.
Here we are in the basics demo class.
So this is not the student class.
Now, let me just here I have commented out the previous method primitives.
So I'm going to show the demo here in the main method itself.
So let's say we want to subtract 0.9 from one, right?
So let's just print that value.
So it should be point one, right?
You're saying one minus.
Nine.
So let's go into the basics directory here and compile.
So it brings this value.
It's not 0.1, but almost 0.1.
Right.
Slightly lower than 0.1.
So that's the thing.
Now, let's take one more example.
Let's say we want to add point one and point two.
And what should it be?
It should be point three.
Recompile and rerun.
Once again, it does not give us the exact number.
It's supposed to be 0.3, but it gives a slightly larger number, which is almost 0.3, but 0.3.
So the reason for this is numbers like point one, point two and so on cannot be accurately represented
within computers, and that's due to the format that computers use.
So they follow a777 54 format and specifically they follow the binary floating point format.
That's the format.
And in that format, such numbers cannot be accurately represented.
Now it's an issue with all languages.
It's not just with Java.
And if you Google for this, you will see that with other languages like JavaScript and Python, they
also have the same issue.
So let me just show you how point one would be represented.
So point one would be something like 0.00011 and this 0011 would.
Be repeated.
It keeps repeating and you would have a finite number of digits.
It's because of the format, but both float and double have a limited number of bets.
So this huge value has to be truncated to whatever float or double would have would need.
So there is an approximation right there.
So, but it is not exactly 0.1 and it would also involve certain rounding.
Rounding will be done at the end.
So there will be some rounding error also.
Now the issue is because the denominator of these numbers are not a power of two.
For instance, if you pick 0.1, it is nothing but one by ten, right?
And ten in the denominator is not a power of two.
If you pick 0.2, it is two by ten, which is one by five, and five is not a power of two.
Now, if you pick 0.5.5 is five by ten, and if you reduce it to its lowest terms, it would be one
by two.
Five by ten is nothing but one by two.
So in the denominator you have to two to the power of one.
So point five can be accurately represented now, but most of the numbers cannot be.
This is especially an issue if we are dealing with money, like the way I mentioned earlier.
Now, in fact, in one of the exercises, one of the students actually ran into this.
Let me just give you a quick example.
It's not the exact code, but something similar, but you get a feel for it if you use float or double
to represent money.
So let's say double is the data type and let's have price as, let's say $1,000 or whatever currency
that you would like to think about.
So next, let's say we want to apply some discount percentage.
Let's give some discount percentage.
Let's say the price of the product is thousand, but there is a discount of 90%.
So let's call it a discount percent.
90% would be point nine.
We can represent it as 0.9.
And.
So double.
So the discount amount.
It would be 900, which is nothing but 1000.
Price times.
Discount percent.
Right.
So that's the discount amount.
You should be se here.
So let's just print this.
So the final price would be price minus discount amount.
So it would be $100.
All right, so let's just recompile this.
Okay.
It prints 100, but one of the students did something different.
What he did was.
Instead of doing this, he multiplied price.
Directly with one minus .91 -0.9, which is nothing but the discount percent.
So let me just get this.
1% is 0.9.
So he directly multiplied this so that he can get 100.
So there's just an alternate way of doing it.
Because the student was not aware of this issue.
So it does not print hundred.
It was printing 99.99.
So there is a minor error here.
There is some approximation because this value is 0.1 and 0.1 cannot be accurately represented.
So because of that, we had that issue.
So when you are dealing with money, you should not be using double and float.
It would be disastrous if you use it.
So what is recommended is to use a class in Java called Big Decimal.
So Big Decimal can be it comes with the Java library and you can use it, especially when you're dealing
with things like money where you need exact results.
So let me quickly show you how it would work.
So just so that you would get a feel for it.
So let's do this point one plus point two here.
So we big decimal is a class, so we are creating an object of that.
We know that it would be like this, but instead of empty parentheses, let's pass something.
Don't worry what this means.
But just think that it represents point one and.
And this represents point two.
And let me just print this.
Now the second object.
Let's call it a second.
And here so fast is an object, right?
It's an object of big decimal.
So I'll say first and big decimal class has a method called add so fast represents 0.1 and we want to
add 0.1 to 0.2, which is represented by this object called second.
So to this method add, we pass this second object as an input.
So don't worry about this because we did not formally discuss methods.
So I just want to show you how this works, how it prints the exact value.
But Big Decimal is a class in Java library and it is part of something called Java dot math package.
So packages will also be discussed later.
So Java Library is split into packages.
But so it will at least give you some feel for how we can use our library.
So that's all there is.
So it should print as point three.
So let me recompile this.
So at Prince Point three, it's no longer this approximate number.
So you need to use big decimal.
Big decimal is slow, but if your application needs it, you have to use it.
So in ecommerce applications, that's what they use.
Now there is an item from effective Java.
It's item 48 in second version.
And in the third version it is item 60.
So it's just a recommended rule.
Items are rules or best practices.
So that item it says avoid, float and double if exact answers are required.
That's what we mentioned in this particular lecture, and that's what this item says.
It also talks about some of these examples and it recommends using big decimal, but it has some more
information beyond what we discussed in this lecture.
So later, once you are through this course or once you're comfortable with Java, you can go ahead
and read that that particular article just so that you will have a little bit more information than
what we discussed.
So it's that's all there is.
So you need to be aware of this pitfalls of float and double, and you would want to use it only if
you are fine with approximate results.
But if you need exact results, you shouldn't be using it.
Thank you and see you in the next lecture and happy coding.